Specify GatedDeltaNet operation for Stateful mode (#34529)
openvinotoolkit/openvino: docs/articles_en/documentation/openvino-ir-format/operation-sets/operation-specs/internal/gated-delta-net.rst

.. {#openvino_docs_ops_internal_GatedDeltaNet}

GatedDeltaNet
=============

.. meta::
  :description: Learn about GatedDeltaNet - a linear recurrent sequence processing
                operation based on the delta rule with a gating mechanism.

**Versioned name**: *GatedDeltaNet*

**Category**: *Sequence processing*

**Short description**: *GatedDeltaNet* represents a linear recurrent sequence model
that combines the delta rule memory update with a gating mechanism.

**Detailed description**: *GatedDeltaNet* implements the recurrence from the paper
`arXiv:2412.06464 <https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.06464>`__. It processes a sequence of
query, key, and value vectors using the delta rule to update a hidden state matrix,
controlled by a per-token forget gate ``g`` (applied as ``exp(g)``) and a per-token
write gate ``beta``. Queries are scaled by ``1 / sqrt(head_size)`` before being used

> to compute the output. The following PyTorch-equivalent code illustrates the full

Author: Done

.. code-block:: py

   def torch_recurrent_gated_delta_rule(
       query, key, value, g, beta, initial_state,
   ):
       batch_size, sequence_length, num_heads, k_head_dim = key.shape
       v_head_dim = value.shape[-1]
       scale = 1 / (query.shape[-1] ** 0.5)
       query = query * scale

       core_attn_out = torch.zeros(batch_size, sequence_length, num_heads, v_head_dim).to(value)
       last_recurrent_state = initial_state

       for i in range(sequence_length):
           q_t = query[:, i]
           k_t = key[:, i]
           v_t = value[:, i]
           g_t = g[:, i].exp().unsqueeze(-1).unsqueeze(-1)
           beta_t = beta[:, i].unsqueeze(-1)

           last_recurrent_state = last_recurrent_state * g_t
           kv_mem = (last_recurrent_state * k_t.unsqueeze(-1)).sum(dim=-2)
           delta = (v_t - kv_mem) * beta_t
           last_recurrent_state = last_recurrent_state + k_t.unsqueeze(-1) * delta.unsqueeze(-2)
           core_attn_out[:, i] = (last_recurrent_state * q_t.unsqueeze(-1)).sum(dim=-2)

       return core_attn_out, last_recurrent_state

**Inputs**

* **1**: ``Q`` - 4D tensor of type *T* and shape ``[batch_size, seq_len, num_heads, key_head_dim]``,

>   the query vectors for each token and head. Scaled internally by ``1 / sqrt(head_size)``

Author: ```suggestion
  the query vectors for each token and head. Scaled internally by ``1 / sqrt(key_head_dim)``
```
